regular meeting of
planning I'll call the regular meeting
of the Planning and Zoning Commission of
the town of Andover to
order first up is uh roll call and seing
of
alets I see an
present Leanne is
present Steve Nelson's
present I do not see Scott
pan
here so
um based on that uh at this point in
Marie I will seat you as an alternate
for Scott
pan sounds
good and I am present as well I also see
uh that Kevin
arneson is here as an alternate
tonight next up our additions or changes
to the agenda and I have none does
anybody have any uh additions or
changes
okay next item up is public
comment any uh comment from members of
the public that
uh on items other than what we've got on
the agenda
tonight Mr chairman this is Katherine
Hutchinson andine I'm respectfully
requesting permission to speak when the
item comes up later on the in the agenda
under old business
6A understand yep thank
you okay moving on
to uh new business and first up is a
town ordinance enabling the zoning
enforcement officer the authority to
access finds for zoning
violations and at this point I'd like to
uh turn over to Dennis O'Brien the
town's attorney to uh brief us on the
ordinance and Dennis I see that you are
mut so we can't hear you
yet myself okay there you go okay okay
you got it right I am Dennis O'Brien and
I am the town attorney and I've been in
that position now for more than 20
years and uh I uh I I don't do much with
the zoning commission I did appear in
front of the zoning commission uh fairly
recently uh regarding the uh Community
Center issue but uh normally I do not do
zoning work in uh uh Andover I did uh I
think when I first started I did for a
while
anyway
uh uh back in uh I've been h i was a
legal aid lawyer for 23 years and then I
I I left and I became a town attorney
and a uh judge of probate but i' I've
been Town attorney in several towns and
when I first started as Town attorney in
towns like Ashford and Mansfield I was
asked to um I was handling zoning work
and I was asked to do U some lawsuits
under uh General statute
8-12 to attempt to get uh o uh owners or
people who control property to uh to uh
uh not violate the uh zoning certain
zoning regulations and that involv
filing a lawsuit in Superior Court took
a lot of time cost a lot of money and
was a very complex process and that was
the only thing that was available at the
time but then in um a few years later
the legislature in its wisdom passed a
new statute 8-12 a general statutes
8-2a that permitted uh towns to do what
uh was they were able to do in other
areas of the law with ordinances and
that is to establish a fines for
violations of the zoning ordinances and
then to enforce those fines through a
process that involved notice to the uh
alleged offender and an opportunity for
them to um uh comply and then uh after
no after a certain period of notice if
they didn't uh then the zoning agent
would uh follow through and uh site them
for the violation and the violation
would carry a fine and the fine is can
be established by an ordinance and
that's the ordinance that you have uh in
front of you that I submitted to Jim Hy
i' I've I have one of those on place in
chaplain um the reason that uh well in
Mansfield it was very easy to implement
because there were people for some
reason or other you know people in
Mansfield think they can do anything and
there are people in Manfield that are
always willing to volunteer to be
hearing officers and to act as judges in
these cases and decide whether in fact
somebody had violated uh uh an ordinance
and should be fined and and but the
problem is I didn't anticipate this
coming from a town like Windam I didn't
anticipate this at all but in towns like
Andover in chaplain who I still
represent uh it was not easy to find
anyone that was willing to do this in
their own town in a smaller town and act
as a judge of their own uh you know
co-residents and uh recently Jim Hy and
I did a case involving zoning but it
also involved light and uh we uh the
town uh in the person of Eric Anderson
Our Town Administrator recruited a
gentleman who uh agreed to uh become the
hearing officer for the town and he uh
volunteered and he and I trained him and
uh we had our first hearing uh on
September
13th and I'd say it went really really
well and we got a an order from him
uh and it was uh you know successfully
uh brought by Jim Hy and we got uh a
conclusion where there was a
fine and uh in in a blight situation you
don't even have to take it to court
after you get the uh after you get the
uh a judgment you can just you can just
lean the property and that's what we did
but but in the zoning uh situation what
happens is if you go through the whole
process person doesn't
comply and the fines uh you know the
fines are daily fines okay I've written
the way I've written the ordinance I
made it $30 a day that's because um in
the past when we first put the ordinance
in um to the town meeting for the um uh
other ordinances that carrye finds not
zoning which is a different
statute um we had uh there was a large
uh group of people that came to the the
hearing and there was some opposition to
it and I think uh you know we were
concerned about finding people too much
and um so we went with I think $25 or
$30 for that ordinance but I'm
suggesting $30 for this $30 a day which
can add up okay the statute 8-12 a that
I mentioned that covers this this zoning
area calls for a possible fine of up to
150 bucks a day
okay that's a lot $150 a day that's like
Fairfield County fine uh maybe uh maybe
T maybe certain parts of Talon County
but not Andover anyway uh I've drafted
an ordinance based on the ordinance that
we have in chaplain and um it is it goes
through a
process uh that uh somebody would have
to go through if if the zoning agent
were to uh uh find them or attempt to
find them I mean the goal is not to
collect fines the goal is to get people
to comply with the zoning
regulations and this is not something
that replaces filing a lawsuit okay it's
an alternative the both both uh options
are still available this is just another
tool in the
toolbox and I think it will work
well um I we have an excellent hearing
officer now Mr rizley and
uh I think we could do this I think
there are cases that um could be brought
this way that we could site somebody for
the violation give them a certain amount
of time uh whatever is reasonable in the
in the in the mind of the zoning agent
to um uh fix the violation and if the
violation is not fixed by the deadline
then you go ahead and you cite them and
in the citation you find them for it
would be 30 bucks a day if we go along
with with what I suggested you could go
higher or lower and this is something
that would have to
be uh it would have to be approved first
by the gatekeeper the board of Selectmen
and then it would have to go to the town
meeting and be pass the town meeting now
what I did in chaplain when we passed
the chaplain ordinance 10 years ago was
I went to uh gave the uh Planning and
Zoning commission the opportunity to
have input because because they should
because you're working with the zoning
regulations and you know the regulations
far far better than I do but uh that's
what I'm doing here I'm asking you to
look this over ask any questions you
might have and um let me know what you
think and I I'm uh I'm pretty committed
to this kind of approach because I
cannot see having had the experience
spending a lot of time suing somebody to
try to get them to cure uh say a setback
violation and uh this uh this me to me
would be a real incentive for people to
um to uh comply with the regulations uh
word gets around and um it's just
another tool in the toolbox of the
zoning agent and also the town attorney
me and it would be easier for me it's
something that I'm familiar with I I had
a lot of these cases in Mansfield they
were not zoning but they were all
violations of Mansfield has a lot of
ordinances that for
f that worked very well and most and the
hearing officers did well uh I attend
the hearings for a while until the U
hearing officer is ready to handle them
on his own but it's a very uh simple
relatively simple in U procedure that is
handled by the citizens of the town and
and and what you do at the end of the
trail if you get a a judgment say for a
th worth of fines against an
individual um the uh the uh zoning uh
I'm sorry the uh hearing officer fills
out a form very simple forms it's a
state court form and passes it on to me
I file it with the suprior court in ton
County and I pay an $8 filing fee as
opposed to 350 for the uh lawsuit and um
pretty much U if the uh the person who's
fined doesn't appeal with 30 days the
fine becomes a judgment a court judgment
it has the effect of of a court judgment
it can be implemented by a wage
execution which I doubt we would use in
a zoning
situation or by placing a lean on the
property where the offense was committed
and that's pretty
much that's pretty much it in a nutshell
and it's it's just another uh way to
deal with some of these cases where uh
zoning regulations are
are uh violated and um you know to uh
compliance has not been obtained so
that's that's my basic um uh talk on
this and I I would be very happy to
answer any
questions so at this point Dennis I did
I did send well Jim sent the uh the
draft ordinance out to all the
commission members so they've had a
chance to take a look at
it um I know Jim had a couple of
comments and can you discuss what the
comments were that you had already
Jim I just pointed out that there was
discrepancy in the amount of
fine one at one point in the in the
draft mentioned $25 and another 30 and
Dennis corrected that and I had a
comment about
okay citing both the
owner and the the Violator in case of a
a business or a rental property and I
believe that was in there anyway upon
further review but nonetheless it's it's
there
now I believe that's about it okay nope
sounds good uh I've been drafted i' I've
taken Jim's excellent comments and made
changes in the latest draft and sent
them Jim and U I'm u i really I'm really
uh pleased by uh working with Jim the
experience we had working on that blight
case together was a good one but it took
a while it wasn't easy but uh I'm used
to that uh that's what uh that's the way
it goes but anyway uh that's that that's
about the size of it I'm if if if there
are any
um suggestions if there are any um they
don't have to come tonight
that's up to you all and I you know I I
really don't need to get your approval
though I'd like to I I I I I certainly
wouldn't want to go to the uh back to
the board of Selectmen without it um but
uh passid approval would be okay too I
mean I just uh I just wanted to give you
the opportunity to comment and Jim is
already done some of that but it's it's
a something that I've done before in
other towns and it works well
in certain cases and it just gives us
another um now that we have a hearing
officer in place who's very good by the
way we have uh the opportunity to do
this and one question Jim asked me I
guess there's some maybe a case or two
pending where there's a
violation and it's it's pending so I you
know under the statute uh basically it's
clear that it makes each day uh that
that the violation continues a new
violation
so I would say that if you have a case
where somebody's been in violation for a
year and uh this thing goes into effect
we could not obviously find them for
anything that they didn't do in the past
but I think once the once the or
ordinance was passed by the town
meeting uh and and these certain there's
a certain period of time before which it
goes into
effect uh once it goes and becomes
effective I think we could uh go right
after that same violator and start uh
the clock running and I I was just
wondering what you all feel about fing
people and and and they you know by the
day or uh it sounds it sounds a little
harsh but um you know it's a way to gain
compliance without uh I mean I I've had
cases where I filed in court uh before
um this went into effect where uh I I
was tied up for two years in one case
and um the courts are slow uh have to
say this I was judge of probate and wind
them for 12 years and I was chief judge
of the children's Court which covers a
counting and a half which included
Andover I did not hear Andover cases uh
but I did supervise the judge I was in
charge of all the supervising the judges
if you can do that it's like supervising
cats but I I but I did um lawyers would
come whenever lawyers had an opportunity
to either come to probate Court which
where the where the procedures are much
simpler or go to Superior Court where
the judges wear robes uh they would come
to
probate and and because they get they'd
get quick action that's what this is all
about well I think it's a great idea
Dennis and uh at this point I'd like to
hear uh any comments or questions that
the other commission members
have I have a general question
yep go ahead not about the the policy
itself but how many cases have we had or
do we currently have that would have
what that would be subject to these
fines right
now I mean are we talking
about three cases 20 cases 100 cases not
100 but probably three or four at in any
given time three or
four yeah and that's current currently
yes
okay well this blight case that we just
handled if I may uh Jim and I handled
together had zoning violations in it as
well and Jim recalls quite well had
violations of a lot of things help code
zoning code and uh we we we were um
hamstrung really by uh by the by the
fact that it was a you know it may I'll
tell you it was a lot easier to just go
with the blight because we were able to
do it through this kind of process and
not having to run into court and uh uh
waste a lot of time and uh it and and
money so uh anyway stre I think
the ordinance worked very well and uh
I'm I was surprised when you said Dennis
that this was a different state statute
that it comes from but I guess that's
why we're doing it in two steps then but
uh um being able to have uh some teeth
without having to get involved with the
courts I think uh is is a great deal for
the
town and uh so I'm I'm in favor of it I
guess uh now again I'm just looking
before uh I will make a motion after
we've had a chance to answer any
questions or concerns the commission
might have uh if there's anything else
that the commission wants to uh ask
before I make a motion
there de I don't have any questions but
I think it looks like a very good plan
and good ordinance think it would really
help to put a little bit of force behind
our ordinances otherwise people just
ignore sometimes well and it did work
well on that property out on Route Six
uh you know that we've been talking
about for a long time so uh yeah I I
thought that was that told the story um
Le and did you have a a comment you were
trying to get in
there yes um to follow up to an Marie's
question um if we what what would if we
have cases that are going on right now
would these fines if they're not
resolved by the date that this goes into
effect would would the daily fines start
to acre then in other words it would not
be
retroactive yes Le work it would not be
retroactive no normally when you pass an
ordinance or a statute there are
exceptions but normally uh normally they
are not applied
retroactive because people haven't been
forewarned and that's that's that's
that's you know that's that's new
process good question that makes sense
and I I like the idea of the the $25 a
day where it is rather than being way at
the upper end or at the upper end I
think it makes it easier to work with
people and still have something in
place well we had uh we had two
different numbers in the the draft and I
think uh Jim and Dennis chose to go with
$30 a day instead of the 25 but it's
still you know up to you it's up to you
yep um I thought I like 30 but uh you
know just just to resolve
it right I did notice both and did see
that you
changed 25 to 30 tonight so um still
it's it's according to attorney O'Brien
is far from the upper end of what's in
the statute right 150 is the upper end
and that's uh that's a pretty stiff fine
and if you go to I think if you go to a
town meeting in in in Eastern
Connecticut with a opposing a fine of
150 bucks a day you're gonna have a
tough time passing the ordinance I I I
think that's too much that's just my own
personal feeling based on many many
years of
experience okay so with that uh I will
make a motion that the Planning and
Zoning commission favorably endorse the
draft uh ordinance on zoning
violations and forward it to the board
of Selectmen for further
action second that thank you an any
other
discussion
hearing none I'll call for a vote Ann hi
Leanne hi Steve hi an Marie hi and I
vote I as well that motion passes 5 z00
thanks for attending tonight Dennis and
I think that's good work that you've got
there I thank you very much and I
appreciate the good work to you all do
as well and you have a a great uh rest
of the meeting thank you thanks Dennis
next up uh is under new business
appointment to the Capitol region
Council of government's Regional
planning
committee and Jim did you want to talk
to
that sure um Capital Region Council of
governments has a regional planning
committee
um meets four times a year I believe uh
the third Thursday of the month meets
virtually at this point in
time um and they go over issues that
affect Regional planning in the area of
specific concern right now is is the
capital
region plan of conservation and
development which I think is why they
reached out to the town trying to get a
member of our
commission to serve on that the
committee Crocs
committee
um and their role would just sort of be
to to participate and bring information
back to the to the commission the local
commission
here so I did note I got a copy of the
dates from from John and uh the June
meeting that they have is on the same
night as our Planning and Zoning
commissions so that we wouldn't be able
to support that so that would get us
down to three meetings for the year the
first of which is this Thursday and I
didn't know if there was any
interest of anybody on the commission to
uh you know want to go and participate
in those meetings on behalf of our
commission and that's about where I
expect
the that to go
um I know I had asked John John didn't
you say you were an alternate for the
town of
Columbia I wasn't sure that Columbia was
in that group yep
so so I it's possible that I can I can
attend some depending on on the the
needs of the Columbia member which is
Tom Courier and you said you had a
conflict for this Thursday coming up I
do
yes I can probably attend that one and
and I think you know the
right I have as much desire as anybody
else to go to more
meetings then um but
uh I may see if I can sit in this
Thursday night and uh and get that
started I would uh obviously prefer John
if you can attend on behalf of both and
over in Columbia that's that's as coste
effective as we can get it um but but
since you're uh you're tied up here and
so uh somewhere down the line if we work
that conflict out maybe you can be the
primary for us and I would alternate uh
going forward on
that that's fine okay and that's that's
about all that uh that's all that I had
anything else John or Jim on uh on that
particular
issue okay I think that wraps up new
business uh now we'll proceed onto the
old business and first up is uh the
status of the Gravel Pit
Jim okay I met with Ellen Certo from
howerin
sage and Jed today and we had had been
provided a lot of the information
previously and gone over it uh look at
our
website all the documents on the website
we viewed the the
YouTube once again and Allan was of the
opinion he did not recommend bring going
forth with a lawsuit he felt that the
applicant
was largely inmp complete
iance with with the plan there was some
just there was some discussion about the
flow of water and as we watched the the
YouTube several
times it became less
clear or more clear that
perhaps the commission assumed the water
was
Contin the demarcation line was was a
little different than
than was being represented in the
meeting meaning that a little more water
flowed off to the south towards the
Hutchinson property then the commission
was originally under the impression
would
happen he did also he further pointed
out that you
know anything that's done on this
property needs a special
permit um meaning anything in the future
it's currently on the market and quote
the town would have another bite at the
Apple and he did not he did say that
town could pursue legal act could take
legal action if they so chose he just
wasn't recommending
it and I think Jim he talked about the
fact that there was a new judge that was
a bit of an unknown
talked about the uh the lengthy process
through the
courts and uh quite honestly uh you know
in just getting to where we had our
meeting today we've had some significant
cost for attorney's fees on doing the
research that led up to today's meeting
and uh and all that so yeah clearly he
was not inclined to think that we should
be going any any further he said he was
he thought the uh applicant was
substantially in accordance with
the um plan that was
approved and
uh and after reviewing it many times and
and having that long conversation today
uh I guess I don't disagree with him
we uh we all agreed that we didn't know
exactly why you know
in why uh
the I think I'm going to call it
696 foot elevation line that wasn't
really a line on the drawing was so far
away from the 694 which was the end of
the flood plane um and when we say so
far it uh
it was like tens of feet not quarters of
miles or something like that but uh
um it did seem that uh what they have is
in agreement with the drawing there the
drawing just didn't have enough detail
and uh if there's any fault there that
is probably that might be my fault for
not demanding uh more detail but I
thought we were pretty close when we
were talking that night not as close as
as I thought we were
um and and we have been trying to get
through a restoration plan for five
years now on what was supposed to have
been a one-year project start to finish
so um maybe I get beat into submission a
little bit there but uh it does seem
like the water is being absorbed into
the property and not running down over
that steep
uh side into the into the flood plane
there anything else to add on that
Jim no any uh any of the commission
members have any thoughts on that at
this
point
okay Miss Hutchinson I guess it's
yours yes thank you very
much obviously I am concerned about the
um conclusion that was reached that yes
there was more water flowing toward my
property and that uh however that the
commission it's recommended to the
commission that nothing be done about it
and I would would respectfully request
that the commission give some serious
consideration toward dealing with it I
understand it's an expensive
process but the C commission made it
clear during the entire application
process that the water was to be graded
so that it did not flow toward the east
or south or my
property and with
that
was supposed to be shown on the plan
that was submitted and restoration plan
was submitted and ultimately the
commission went with um that did show
had the arrows pointing toward the
proposed low point in the middle running
down the middle the proposed um area
that was to drain it toward the
back and
I guess at this point um I would
respectfully request the
commission give some consideration to
pursuing that as opposed to just letting
things
go okay and uh Jim and I did talk today
about the the latitude that this new
ordinance might provide to it is if we
get there
um I
uh John if you
can I'm going to try and post the
approved map that's under the archive
section there that we talked about on
8:15 and
uh if you were familiar enough with that
and could call it up that would be great
if if you don't think so if you let me
to share my screen I will try to call
that up uh I'm concerned that you know
when when alen Jim and I were looking we
we were looking at a blow up of the
screen there and I won't have the
technical skills to blow it up right so
everybody can see what we were talking
about but I will give it a quick
attempt you should be able to
share
[Music]
and yeah and I don't see what I was
looking for here um so I guess we will
will have
to put that off we'll get our ducks in a
row a little bit better and at the next
meeting um have the right drawing that
we can show to everybody and and
explain what was brief to us and why we
think it's substantially in
compliance
um and and discuss it more at that
point I just have one of uh question
slash
request I has either you or Jim or uh
anyone seen the erosion on the souly
side that my property that my side is on
up
close are you talking about on the
uh on the Gravel Pit property where it
flowed down as you get close to that
Mound there or you talking about some
place specifically as you're looking at
it from Route Six the right hand side
joins 50 feet away my property that
whole stretch the full flat area as well
as in the back where the hill um with
the hill in the back
there's I believe that's where you're
referring to the erosion I'm referring
to the erosion that exists basically
from Roe 6 all the way
back I have not been out there
recently Jim you can speak do it uh if
you're familiar with it but I have not I
have not been out there when
our dialogue fell apart I had asked
for I asked geneves if I could access
his property to monitor it and he never
responded to me and at that point uh
I chose not to I'd be happy to follow up
but it didn't occur to me um I I did see
it you know previous to that I could
access it from your property Katherine
yes you certainly could I was just gonna
suggest that if yeah um as long as as
long as it's accessible I know it's
extremely overgrown at some point I
don't know where on the
property but I'd be happy to give it a
shot perhaps I could touch base with you
um because it's been pretty wet but
there may be u a way of getting a strip
mode along my line obviously on my
property so that we might more easily
access it but why don't you look into it
and I'll speak with you we'll go from
there okay and I don't mind walking it
just it just extremely a lot of brambles
and such in there yeah well perhaps as I
said we could get a strip mode run
through there so that you could see it
more easily I'd be happy to do that
great I'm not guaranteeing it because I
don't know how wet it is there but to
get a tractor down
um sure to get in there
but either either that or we put on
Brier free resistant clothes and go for
a walk I'll touch base with you okay
very
good and so uh you know at the next
meeting one of the things we might
choose to do is once again do a S
sidewalk over there so that the
commission can see exactly what Miss
concerns are I know we did
that um when it led to the conversation
that I thought we had a better agreement
than we did with uh where that water was
going to go
um but anyhow so between now and the
next meeting I will make sure that we
have the documentation that I can get up
on the
screen uh to present and and show what
uh our attorney
thought and then uh we'll we'll make the
decision based on input from Jim on
whether or not we want to do a site walk
on
that any other comments on the gravel
bit okay I'm going to move on to uh item
6B connectivity Grant trails and
uh John I was hoping you could just give
us a quick update I had to leave early
from the the public information session
the other night how uh how did that end
up
going yep yes Leanne yes I I thought I
was unmuted I had a couple of questions
about the Gravel Pit oh go ahead yep um
one is Jim did the attorney go out there
in
person no he did not did look at the
asilt drawing you not go out there in
person okay and I have a a real concern
that everyone knows how much time we've
spent on this and I have a couple
comments one is that you know Mr geneves
has not responded to several um attempts
at correspondents and you know that were
sent directly to him or through Chris
Bell so this is not the first time when
Jim said that he didn't hear back from
him about walking the property himself
so he does have a habit of doing this
and I think it would be
um a real obstacle to all of the work
that we've put in as it yet it's been I
think almost exactly 5 years since we
went on the S sidewalk there to just
drop so to speak the restoration plan um
I don't think enough has been done with
that so I hope that that's one of the
things we can take up next
month yes we
will okay thanks
yep okay John now we'll move on to the
connectivity uh Grant
presentation okay um so as as Jed said
uh last week uh Tuesday I believe there
was a public information session to
discuss um the town's initiatives to uh
develop some uh bicycle and pedestrian
connectivity basically between um the
the town's um Civic campus where the
town hall and Elementary School and the
senior center are um and um The Hop
River Trail and the municipal facilities
to the north side of Route Six which
include the athletic fields and the
um
uh post office and and and that sort of
thing
um so there uh we had had some initial
discussions about having en visioning
session to determine which route to u
pursue and the two main routes were you
know more or less an on-road option or a
you know an option immediately off of
Route 316 and then the other option
being um Overland basically through the
woods through the town-owned land to the
rear of town hall and Senior and the
senior center out to the hop River Trail
um and upon discussing it we determined
that it
was both both routes um were preferred
uh for sort of different reasons
different purposes um different Target
users um they were both worth pursuing
and there are different funding
mechanisms to provide for both so
working with our consultant uh Barton
and the Judith engineering um we first
tackled the question of um the
onroad I I I shouldn't say onroad
because it would be a multi-use trail on
the side of Route
316 um from school road all the way to
Cider Mill uh then it would go literally
on road basically a shared Road on Cider
Mill um linking back with
316 and and being uh alongside the road
for that short stretch heading north to
um hop River Trail and it would sort of
go up the hill to meet the Hop River
Trail um there was a lot of uh
individual input from Property Owners
along 316 because this would be
essentially a very wide sidewalk some
somewhere between six and 10 feet wide
paved um off of the side of the road
which would be basically almost entirely
within State RightWay so not actually on
private people's property however there
would be some elements um of uh that it
would encroach a little bit but because
of slope and and Grading and um width of
the right of way and telephone poles and
things like that uh where it would
encroach a little bit onto people's um
land but you know again would be on
State Property although you know if you
if you abut 316 the whole front yard
feels like yours so so there was a lot
of uh conversation with the people who
that the trail would cross um their
their in front of their
land um and it was you know people had
concerns but were generally supportive
um and the the good thing is we were
able to sort of FastTrack the design um
schematic process and submit a grant to
lsip which is the local Transportation
uh Capital Improvement program funded
through the capital region Council of
government um and while we haven't
received any sort of official word on
that um the information from the capital
region is that they received that they
they had more money
in their fund than they got project
applications so as long as you know as
long as we didn't you know scribble on a
you know wet napkin and crayon um and it
was a legitimate application it should
be fundable um so I think that's good
news obviously the designs were
preliminary and there's a lot of work
still to be done but but it seems very
positive at this point um so that we'll
hopefully hear on that one soon the
second path is the Overland path um
which would be you know obviously
steeper sort of less friendly to a quick
commute and if you're you know trying to
get from one place to another it
wouldn't necessarily be the path you'd
take but it is it does help create a
continuous loop and another way to get
um you know to access other other state
and town
facilities um that is still very
preliminary design um and we basically
applied for a d recck Trail Grant um for
you know a small amount of money to
basically bring that to engineering
designs um so we're not looking
necessarily to build anything there yet
but just sort of take the next step and
so what's nice is you know when when
sort of faced with the choice of you
know should we focus on this Trail or
focus on this Trail we got to say both
and and hopefully both uh Concepts will
be
moving literally and figuratively down
the road
soon any questions for John on that
yeah John um on the first option that
you talked about the the trail adjacent
to the road What's the timing on that
Grant application and when would we
think the town would receive
funding um I I you know the the the
grant went
in um mid
February um and it was you know it's
preliminarily at kog my my anticipation
would be they'd probably make the the
preliminary announcement within the next
month or so um I mean these projects are
always a little you know attenuated um
particularly if State money is involved
um and you know not only is State money
involved but State roadways are involved
um but I would anticipate if we if we
heard something and got under contract
sometime this summer um we could
probably spend the
um you know the the next n month uh
doing final design and working with do
do on on permit Pathways you know if all
goes well could we start construction
next summer I think it's possible um I
think it's probably more
reasonable that we'd be looking for
completion probably 20126 but um I you
know I think it's it's possible to get
underway next
year would be my anticipation and you
know fortunately Eric is not with us to
contradict me and you know jump up and
down and so don't tell them that
but um I I I think that's not that's not
a
crazy thought but again it's it's the
state state Grant State money state
property so sometimes the wheels turn
slow thanks John it does sound really
encouraging um yeah I think I mean the
the key is you know I think it's it's
it's of obvious Community benefit the
the key will be to make sure that both B
and the the property owners along the
trail sort of have their concerns heard
yeah any other questions or comments for
John okay hearing none uh let's move on
to the update on the plan of
conservation and development and John
that's uh you
again okay well we
have um our Quorum and we have our
technology seems to work so um I'll do
that does this look like a PowerPoint
presentation to everyone it does yeah
okay I I'm gonna I'm gonna Buzz through
this a little bit so we're going through
two elements of the plan of conservation
and development process first is just a
quick demographic overview sort of a
snapshot of where we are as a town um
and then I harvested the the most most
recent responses from the survey that
we've done um and so we'll kind of go
over some preliminary results but I note
that the survey is still open and we're
still getting getting in responses every
day and John I did note that in the
little inbox there at the entrance to
the town hall today there were probably
10 to 15 is that right survey so okay
I'll have I'll have to swing past and
and pick them up yep um okay thanks for
the note um okay so again um have a
number of um demographic slides here we
caveat all of these by saying these are
already a couple of years old we Ed for
the most part um 2020 census figures
although I think things are not changing
very quickly in Andover um and then the
second thing is you know much of this is
pretty self-evident I'm not telling you
guys anything you don't know but um so
uh
andover's population a little over 3100
as of 2020 um primarily strongly almost
90% non-hispanic white um with small
minorities of um non-hispanic
multi-racial
4% um non-hispanic blacks one um and and
other hispan and and 4% Hispanic um the
bottom chart shows basically uh how
Andover Stacks up in those things in
those uh ethnic classes relative to the
state uh Andover is in green is the
green bar um so you'll see at the bottom
that's white only obviously Andover is
more white than the state as a whole um
the uh sort of rust colored bar in the
middle is talin County and the uh blue
is the the state of Connecticut as a
whole so the state of Connecticut as a
whole is a little over 60% white Andover
is little 90% white um the state is
about 15 to 20% Hispanic and and again
Andover is about four% so it's it's
relatively homogeneous relative to the
the rest of the state um population
estimates uh you know the the the chart
looks like things are dropping off a
cliff but you know the the the uh the y-
axis of that chart is really only you
know 3,50 people to 3350 people so it's
a 300 person span from top to bottom of
the chart so you will note you know over
over
um a few years uh andover's population
has has declined from about 3,300 to
about 3150 um I think it's probably not
that
um we we lost you know 80 people or so
um between 2019 and 2020 it's it's
possible um some of that could have been
out migration some of that could have
been uh death you know that 2020 was the
census year was also a covid year um so
so fatalities were a little higher that
year it's also possible um I'm I'm
suspecting that the population estimates
leading up to 2020 were just that
estimates um from the American Community
survey um and the 2020 number was 100%
count so it's possible that the decline
was a little bit faster and and and and
steadier heading to 2020 but as of you
know as of 2020 were you know about 150
people lighter than were in
2010 um John
I did look you know I was trying to find
anything more recent than
2020 and uh I went to the Connecticut
demographics.com and they had a
uh population of
2022 of
3160 and so I was looking to see if you
know when everybody started working from
home I was hoping that that would cure
the
decline but uh in in that data point
shows that that it did it leveled off if
uh maybe not going up again so I think
you know we we don't I don't uh know
that we have a real
good yeah no actual idea of what the the
future is going to hold there yet
hopefully not as dreary as what that
shows true I have a comment too um I've
been talking to the superintendent of
schools and what she's seeing with the
school is that houses have been selling
and then been bought by families with
young kids so uh for a while we were
dropping because of the elderly
population was moving out or passing
away but now they're getting more young
families in so that we may be seeing an
uptick or not as much of a drop as what
they ually thought okay that's positive
um yeah and and again what the other
thing to to note here which is that I
think that's a positive note um and um
is that you know these are these are
small numbers you know we're we're
talking about you know 10 people 50
people here and there um that that you
know could could affect you know one of
these one of these charts um the
population Trends uh and projections um
the lower left um was from the
Connecticut state data Center they're
the only data projections we really have
Unfortunately they were also done pre
covid which which obviously shook things
up somewhat but Andover according to
this was projected to have peaked at its
202 2020 I'm sorry 2010 census about
3,300 um and sort of have a steady slow
decline for the next um 25 years or so
I'm sorry 15 years or so um which you
know doesn't
seem impossible but it's also certainly
not written in the star in pre-ordained
um things could certainly turn turn
around and and again these are very
small differences um so again on the on
the right Andover is projected to shrink
by another you know 500 600 people or so
um and Connecticut is expected to grow
very very modestly um over that same
same time frame so a few a few
municipalities may may gain but most
municipalities are are going to be
somewhat stagnant I think the bottom
line here is don't expect massive change
uh one way or another the next in the
next 15 years or so um in terms of our
age group demographics um again we have
uh handovers Distribution on the um
upper left and the overall distribution
compared to uh 2020 and 2020 on the on
the lower right um the things you know
you would note on the left is the
longest bars is the largest percentage
of population um basically your your
5050 to 60 your 45 to 65 essentially
makes up about 40% of the town's
population um the largest the largest
sort of set there and what I would point
out in the lower right bar um is the the
light blue is where our population curve
was in 20 uh 20 I'm sorry 2000 um the
medium blue is 2010 the dark blue Is
2020 so if you sort of draw a curve over
each one um and I don't know if you can
see my cursor um but it it sort of Peaks
the 2000 Peaks between 35 and 45 um the
2010 Peaks at 45 to 55 essentially and
then the peak for um the most current
census 2020 is now at at 55 to 65 so you
know there's some fluctuation here but
the old overall peak of the population
the the the the plurality of of cohorts
is sort of Shifting old which you know
again is it should not be surprising to
anyone on this on this call um but there
are as you say and um you know the um
the under five the young child uh
demographic um has increased a little
bit from 2010 to
2020 um the school age kids are sign
signicantly down your five to 15 are
significantly down um but but your
college age kids are holding steady um
and again it could be could be a
migration of of more young families
which would be which would be
welcome um John you go back to that last
slide again for just absolutely a typo
up on the the left hand this
one the third the fourth bar down shows
I think that should be that should be 20
20 y okay very good
thank you good catch I I I caught that
as well but I should have I should have
brought attention to it before you did
because I would have seemed more no you
got to give me a chance to do so
okay
um okay uh so this is um units and
structure um this are our household um
and again you all live in Andover you
know Andover were were very very
significantly majority single family
detached housing there are a few units
um 3 to four units 5 to9 units
um but by and large it's a it's a single
family detached
Town um
interestingly also perhaps not
surprisingly um in
2020 um the uh household sizes the one
and two person households make up over
60% nearly two almost twoth thirds of
the town's population um is is in one or
two person households so it's relatively
small families we have you know about
about a fifth each of three person
households and four or more um but
interestingly what you see if you look
so so we have a lot of very small
households um but if you look at the
graph on the right um which is average
household size over the last um 15 years
and again this data is a little bit
older um or 20 I know we're almost 25
years of data now um in 2000 the 2000
census household size was 2.64 which is
larger than either Talon County or
Connecticut um which were both about
2.55 um and that stayed steady for about
20 years since then um so even though um
we have a large number of of small
households one and two person um our
average household size is is remaining
relatively steady and I think you know
sort of reflecting that the house the
housing stock um you know are are larger
houses larger single family um which are
which are certainly familyfriendly you
know you can have two three four kids um
in the in the big houses of
Andover in terms of income and
unemployment um and over again not
surprisingly is a little bit um
wealthier uh a little bit higher income
than Talon County or Connecticut in
general about you know 10 12,000 above
Talon County and 20 over the state of
Connecticut
um which again is reflective of single
family detached High ownership um
economy um and over the chart on the
lower left uh shows you the immigration
and out migration of jobs um there are
less than 70 people who both live and
work in Andover there's not a ton of
jobs that that um support an Andover
lifestyle um we do import about 270
people um come to Andover to work but
most people from Andover that are
working are leaving so over 1500 people
are leaving Andover um for
work again not surprisingly uh but the
unemployment rate is extremely low in
Andover as of 2021 we're at 3% um which
are which are which is well below even
the very low numbers in Talon County and
Connecticut is in general so um it's
it's it's affluent it's comfortable
place um but just you know people don't
aren't working
here um
so that's that's a bit about the
demographics um again no no real
surprises there um I wanted to go
through some of the preliminary results
of the survey so this ad hopefully
people have seen it I don't know has
this ad been posted in the River East I
I saw it but it was sort of stuffed in
with all the other ads and it I almost
missed it because it I thought it was
like another real estate ad or something
like that it should have probably been
in like an article up in the top of the
page instead of stuffed in the bottom
but I don't know if you had any choice I
yeah I I mean we can we could probably
talk to um Eric if if we want to maybe
buy a more prominent spot there was an
article um you know about the the survey
done about a month ago now um it
unfortunately had the link to the survey
but it was sort of across two lines and
a little bit harder to follow I had
given the the journalist the QR code
that he could pay into his article but
heed not to um but despite that um you
know and so this is you know we've been
trying to promote this and hopefully
it'll be in in for another another issue
of River Easter too yeah it was in the
last two weeks last two Fridays okay
great um and we wow up to 181 answers so
right so not bad we're coming long plus
plus your 10 or 15 that are sitting
there in town hall Jed yeah so we could
in a matter of a couple days be up close
to 200 um so I'll go through preliminary
results again this is this is as things
stand right now um folks so the the blue
lines this is liver working Andover um
as we saw with that in migration out
migration we have a very large
population of folks um living in Andover
but working in other towns and then the
orange line at the bottom is living
Andover and are retired um so that tells
you a little bit about the folks that
are that are filling this out not a lot
of people um working an and over that's
probably just one possibly two responses
of working and and
over um and as you recall for because
I'm sure everyone on online took the
took the survey so you're familiar with
the questions um we ask people to rank
highest priorities um this was under
Economic Development and um even though
one is the top priority and seven is the
lowest priority the way the data is
projected here is the longer bar means
higher priority so um so the more retail
along six was the most popular
response um and and you know it was it
was most frequently people's top
priority um followed you know by more
restaurants and more service and
professional um and as more small
businesses um in that area uh least
popular which is nice to see is no major
changes to the economic development
um strategy people people generally
supported being a little bit more
aggressive particularly along six
Corridor in terms of housing options uh
in Andover uh again the the longer bar
means the the more popular answers um so
there was you know 20% um you know
stated that we don't we are fine with
our housing options as they are but um
far more than that people identified
young families as well as young
professionals seniors and teachers
firefighters and other other um critical
employees um as being important and with
young families being easily the the
plurality
choice so and so I guess when we get get
to the end of this for the commission
with John's help you know we we see here
we think we need more housing
opportunities for young families which I
think you know everybody recognized what
a great school we have here we need to
bring the housing opportunities and I'm
not exactly sure what young families are
looking for there but we've got to build
something that uh allows them
to move into Handover so they could take
advantage of that great school that we
have and that's that's going to be our
challenge where we can influence it is
what can we do to uh help build it so
they will come we've got the school
if we build the housing I think people
will come so they could take advantage
of
it yeah and I think yeah there's I mean
those are those are regulatory things we
can do you know Financial incentives
things that we can do um but that yeah
we'll those are all for brainstorming
when we get to those
discusss um types of housing uh that
that are should be provided again
reflecting the the the established
character of Andover people like you
know people are here because they like
here um and and the character of Andover
is largely single family detached um so
that was the most popular option people
did find some support for single family
with accessory Apartments which is you
know enabled by the zoning regulations
as well as some two family and Tow
houses um people generally didn't
support you know larger multif family
developments or three or four family as
as common but again that you know that
that reflects sort of the established um
uh patterns in Handover John what's the
difference between a three and four
family and a townhouse I guess I thought
they were kind of the same thing yeah um
I you know I think a a townhouse um can
be sort of more than Peter porn family
but I I picture it as you know as a row
semi detached um a three or four family
you know tends to be in sort of a single
structure with a single entrance sort of
sort of um setup you know a two over two
or something like that
um but yeah I mean it they can be very
similar I know my mom at one point she
lived in this uh housing community that
had they were all triplexes and so you
had you two end units and then you had a
unit in the center you know they each
had uh a two-car garage each had a uh
you know their own entryway in that but
I thought that suited itself well I
thought one it was very nice but two it
was uh well suited to have the center
unit being the affordable
component and that get you your your
one-third affordable that we required to
have and uh so I was disappointed when I
saw this and I I think it's probably
because we haven't uh let folks know
very well what we're looking at yeah to
do that but that might be something we
have to uh yeah I how to overcome that
when we get to the end where you know
the town is clearly spoken they don't
want three and four bedroom units well
that's I think that we could probably do
some more nuanced uh polling on that and
and we've done in other towns
particularly when looking at the
affordable housing plans uh which were
you know done the last couple of years
um are um are like basically visual
visual preferences you know where
they're shown something like what you're
describing for your for your mother Jed
where it was you know a three side by
side which I would picture as kind of a
townhouse structure or you know or you
know a a a three-story apartment sort of
thing um but yeah people can express you
know preferences visually also and that
may be something we want to explore I
was disappointed when the apartments got
a bit more favorable rating than the
three and four
family I and I think you know and and
you know not wanting to read into
responses there but you know I think
Apartments tend to be single location
you know all all sort of on its own um
at least in Suburban towns that we don't
have Apartments Apartments Apartments
Apartments Apartments like you might
have in in you know
cronwell
right um okay so we looked at uh then
Community resilience and sustainability
priorities there um the most popular
being upgrading of roads and bridges um
to address you know increased flood
volumes and things like that um to deal
with climate change um the rest of the
ones are fairly clustered um upgraded
power data infrastructure and making
sure and over roads and bridges are are
properly maintained um where um you know
popular but there was no you know truly
unpopular option I think you know people
tended to have slightly different
slightly different you know third and
fourth choices which kind of even those
even that noise out a
bit um somewhat similar we asked about
open space and conservation and natural
resources um which are the priorities
focusing on Trails um and
interconnection of open space was the
blue line that was the most popular um
there was also you know strong support
for investing in stewardship of
properties and open space that we
already have um investing in active
Recreation which just to say things like
ball field you know soccer pickle ball
tennis um uh baseball and uh then
focusing on efforts on Andover Lake uh
as a as an important natural resource
and conservation feature so you know no
no real real um poor support again other
than other than the statement and over
has sufficient open space which received
the lowest support which is again you
know um it's a a strong support for
conservation and particularly
particularly trails and
connections um we ask for people to rate
you know from basically one to five
strongly agree agree neutral disagree
strongly disagree
um on several issues about about
longrange
planning um all of these were very much
in the middle you know an answer of
three is neutral two is a is a agree um
all of them um received you know
basically between 4.35 and
4.55 um except for uh route six um the
town should actively Market available
and undeveloped commercial land along
the six um 40% by far the strongest
response said strongly agree another 24%
said agree um so that had by I would say
you know overall that was clearly the
strongest um agreement in terms of
long-term planning so as we saw with the
Economic Development question at the
beginning Route Six is clearly a focal
point um we then asked about uh Town
Services um and it was funny uh I was
filling in um the manually a number of
survey responses that I believe Jed you
must have harvested at um some sort of
senior breakfast or senior lunch in um
because there were probably 12 of those
and all of them all of them had Services
for Seniors as the top priority and and
Andover public schools as a very low
priority um without casting aspersions
on on the people who filled it out that
was they were clearly an interest group
um but what what we saw overall is
strong support for endover public
schools um and Public Works roads
Bridges um Trails uh and then obviously
you know sort of moderate support all in
the middle for seniors General
government parks and rack Etc uh
Transportation was surprisingly uh the
lowest I I um some of the the surveys I
looked through I'll rank those quite
high but I think uh overall that sort of
you know uh leveled
out that might be because of the
upgrades that have been recently done
there to transfer station I don't know
but so yeah so certainly a lot better
than it used to be taken care of yeah um
so uh this is now a question of concerns
How concerned are you about various
issues again the same fivepoint scale
very concerned to not concerned at all
um and again you know everything tends
to to land in the middle somewhere
between you know neutral and and cons
conc ered um all of those had you know
somewhere between you know 2.3 and
3.3 um which is sort of the the slightly
concerned end of neutral um the two
strongest responses um with over 30%
saying very concerned were aging
infrastructure um and affordability of
living in andov and I think that's
that's very telling you know the um uh
you know there was there was some strong
response on overdevelopment and of
Natural Resources um and changing
demographics um but I think some of
those those those things are are
intimately related um but I that's this
was I think maybe one of the most
interesting um questions thus
far happy to see the low number there on
crime yes yes that I mean people
basically a three basically people are
neutral about crime you know I think
they're no one's um is going to the very
few people are saying you know not
concerned at all but uh but people were
not uh too terribly alarmed
seem um I did wordcloud this isn't to
revealing yet I think we want to filter
these out a little bit so we had asked
two questions uh free response
open-ended what's something you hope
will happen to end over in the next 10
years and then later what's something
you're worried about um and so again
this is word cloud the most more time a
word appears the the bigger it is um so
you know you can pick up some of these
words you know infrastructure schools
businesses and over Plaza I thought was
interesting was a multiple thing um
senior housing retail development
affordable housing restaurants um stay
small town Town Center um I think
there's some good responses there I
think what we'll try to do um to is
refine this a little bit and take out
you know simple repetitive words we
don't need the word town or the word
Andover um so we we we'll see if we can
make those um a little bit more
usable but it's it's a nice visual tool
um second is the the question about
worried what are you worried about um
and this you know fewer words were used
um that that really pop Elementary
School businesses taxes crime um
aging climate change um you know if if
you combine property taxes increasing
taxes taxes um you know tax based you
know a lot of those things are are
circling around obviously the same topic
so we can we can find ways to um to
refine that but it's it's interesting to
sort of
see uh what what what people are saying
like all at
once um and then we asked a couple of
questions about demographics so just so
we can see who was um taking the survey
again you know my my initial thought
having you know my own bias of having
entered a number of these in manually
from from a senior lunch in um I was
surprised that uh that the 70 plus
population was relatively small and it
was about the same as the young family
uh you know the 30 to 44 year old
demographic was about the same as the 70
plus and you most responses like most
people in town somewhere between 45 and
70 um and so I you know I think the
response at least at this point is
fairly reflective of the adult
population uh you know demographic in in
Andover um and then you know the income
uh is is probably also reflective um you
know our our basically three largest
income cohorts were you know between
75,000 and um over 150 so 75 and up uh
was was a lot of responses so these are
most likely established you know
homeowner um employed or or comfortably
retired and again you know as we saw do
you own or R your home
looks like we're at about
94% own uh the home with a very small
rental population and and that you know
we know that that's you know the rental
numbers are higher than this so we're
we're getting a sight um overabundance
of homeowners and and we may want to see
if there's something we can do to to
solicit renters a little bit and also I
would say uh younger younger adults and
younger families um
so uh again the survey is gonna going to
stay open it's up to to you guys when we
when we ultimately close it out um but
there could be some other things we do
to um solicit additional responses and
one of those things that that's been
somewhat successful in other places is
um if the school is amendable to this
sort of thing um oftentimes we can
request that the school um do a you know
a stuffer um for the kids going home uh
so goes into the kids folders and comes
home with them um to encourage families
to participate in this process um that
would really be my primary suggestion to
to reach those kids unless there's some
way uh good good distribution list
through parks and wreck um where we can
we can solicit particularly um you know
your your young
families um but that's where we are
right
now John yes
ma'am hi this is Leanne um I think it
was an excellent idea to include the 70
plus age group here because I see a lot
of surveys that just say 65 and older
and people are quote Living longer
unquote and so every this this allowed
there not just to be one lumped in group
of people who are 65 and older um which
I think is important because
you know you could have people 70 and
older who were the parents of people who
were in their 60s and I think it also
points up a couple things about um it
may give us some indication of the
people who are interested in staying in
town as far as the question about the
senior housing and then including people
who were 70 and over and I think it also
points up that not everybody say age 60
and older retires at the same time some
people never retire some people want to
downsize some people don't so I think
that was a good tool to have to break it
up into another age group because like I
said most surveys I see just say
everybody's 65 and older
period thank you um and I think what um
what I think we will do hopefully at the
end is um we'd probably do' like to do
some cross tabs um and on on some of
these things so I think as I as I said
in my my little anecdote um you know
noting that you know a lot of your 70
plus folks are obviously concerned with
you know senior facilities um then you
know and I am sure as we as we break it
out into the responses from 35 to 44
year olds the school is probably a
higher priority so I want to do that
that formal cross tab as well as
probably um word clouds um or a modified
word Cloud for each of the major
demographic groups because it would be
interesting to see what are the hopes of
the 70 plus folks what are the hopes of
the 35 to 44 year olds what are the what
are their fears as well um or their
concerns as well I but I think um yeah
it's it's valuable to have broken that
out I have a question about the
demographics that you had there with the
types of
homes uh where working on getting the
affordable housing and the
um uh types
of like we have a senior um I'm trying
to an in-law apartment on the house so
with an in-law apartment you have the
main house and you have a little
apartment where do those get categorized
it's not really a single family yet it's
not an
apartment where did those get
put um
I think the well I think it it depends
on what the actual structure of it is um
if the you know if so because sometimes
there are sort of Senior Communities
active adult communities that are either
freestanding sort of bungalow type
things in in sort of a tight cluster
that would probably
be well it depends on what how we
defined it those would probably be
single family um detached but you know
in many cases they would be essentially
a a condominium or common interest
Community sort of setup
um you know I know in our neighborhood
and a few blocks away of at least four
houses that have an in-law apartment
attached and they're attached so is that
considered still a single family house
or is it with an accessory apartment
isn't that the single family house with
the accessory apartment that's what we
would we would call that was that a
category yes
yes um and okay and you know and also
it's how we how we Harvest our data
um is you know so that that question was
um the preference question well I think
the single family well hold on hold on
uh the single family with accessory
Apartments was in the survey um I don't
think accessory Apartments was in the
demographics present was in the
demographic no it wasn't it was in the
survey John right um so so but um if
we and and this was the the the single
family uh attached single family detach
two apartments three or four apartments
from the demographics that's Census Data
um we can actually get better data from
our assessor um using C codes because in
in C single family single family with
accessory apartment and two family are
actually three different codes so we can
do a much finer grain um uh analysis
what we got okay thank
you hey John I apologize I missed it
earlier but how many total responses do
you have at this point a little over
180 okay that are they're recorded again
Jed is telling me we have uh some some
hard copy to be entered um and we've
been getting two three four a day
trickling in um so you know keeping it I
don't see a real downside keeping it
open for the while and there's two tools
we haven't used yet and uh you know
Eric and I were working on something to
send out to the all the board and
commission members to make sure that
they understood the importance and send
it in and I don't think that ever got
sent out and uh so I'll have to follow
up with Eric on that and we wanted to do
that and then we were going to follow up
with the communication uh you know blast
going out to the entire town to fill it
in so we've got a couple other big
things to use and I like John's idea
about uh getting it out through the kids
at the school I think one I think the
school would like to get it out that way
um I don't know John if you had a
thought on
do we just send the QR code out because
most of the the parents are younger and
and they uh they do that stuff better
they certainly we don't need to send the
paper copy home for them that is not the
group that wants the paper copy to send
in well I yeah so I um the you know the
we could send yeah right um but I'm
wondering if we want to send a you know
a half sheet that has the QR code on so
get stuffed in the boxes and then kid
kids bring it home parents can just scan
the QR code you know I want to be
sensitive to not not overburdening the
school with having to distribute
something like this but if there's
someone um friendly with the school
district that I could work with I'd be I
think an's that
person I think the used to do an email
to all the parents like um I don't know
if they still do that an like the Friday
update or the Sunday night update from
the principal I I don't know if they do
that they probably have
something um I know a few years ago they
did every single Friday they said really
was Sunday night yeah but if we were to
send a half sheet home of that ad that
we wear in the uh the River East which
was very small we put that half a half
sheet size so uh it didn't get lost with
all the other stuff or even a full sheet
but uh that's probably all we need to to
do to get it out to the
parents oh yeah and if you want to if
you could just be in touch with me if if
you know either you could ask or just
give me the right person to ask and I'll
um pursue it thank
you
any other comments from the commission
at this
point okay and you the most positive
thing I saw of all the data was that
little demographic that showed the uh
the young kids uh you know
increasing um I thought that was great
news and my my thinking is that you can
increase the load at the school without
having to increase the cost so much
because most of the the school budget is
fixed cost until you start adding more
teachers or something but we're never
going to you know we're never going to
exceed the capacity of the building
there so so anyhow I thought that was
good
news anything else you want to uh pass
on to us that point
John am Mar you had a
comment no I was just going to say it
looks great so far yep okay yep y I
agree so I think that concludes the old
business next up is the uh approval of
the minutes from the meeting on 16th of
January and I'll make a motion that the
minutes be
approved
second and and I think uh there were
maybe two
comments on the minutes and Marie
weren't you in attendance at that
meeting I was yes okay so you should be
on the list of participants and then
down uh under new business where we were
talking about the burnap Brook
Road property swap there was a line in
there it said the town would give up
land in return that is in the flood
plane and
uh somebody pointed out to me that uh we
probably wouldn't have said that and I
went back to review it as did Marina
neither of us could find that so I'm not
exactly sure how that thought get in
there but I would
uh recommend that we strike that line uh
from the minutes because uh it was not
said any other comments on the minutes
I think I made a motion to approve I
can't recall if we had a
second yes yes who who seconded it I
think Leanne and I both seconded same
time okay well we'll give that to
Leanne and uh I'll call for a vote on
approval of the minutes an i
Leanne I Steve I and Marie I and I vote
I as well the motion passes 500
Z next up on the agenda is
Administrative reports uh
Jim yes seems to be bit of an uptick in
activity of a seasonal nature uh a lot
of
preditions sheds Etc is a
one a new single family home on shotty
Mill application came
in um see I am working on a a matrix of
costs associated with planning zoning
commissions I believe it was a
suggestion of the board of selectman um
see what other towns were charging for
for subdivisions for for variances um
what have you bring that together just
take a look at and see where town of
Anover
stands um I am involved in a number
of Enforcement cases um I did reach out
to the Connecticut Med Meditation Center
which is uh 131
root6 and
there which is the Buddhist otherwise
known as the Buddhist temple and I did
get a
call today I did not speak the gentleman
got a message um indicated they would be
coming forth with an application some
point very soon um I have yet to
contact the mountain of worship which is
on shotty Mill which is
a
Church of sorts U that's been operation
for for quite a many quite many years so
I be reaching out to them to see see
what we can do to bring them into
compliance um I'm working with Protek or
uh I'm sorry Benjamin
Franklin and Mer Valley Lake Lake
Road to address their pite conditions U
more particularly they have a number of
boats and a trailer out there uh which
is not on their approved site plan and
their lighting is not in
compliance other than that I have
nothing to
report any questions be happy to
address so a question for the commission
and I don't know uh I've
got a matrix that Jim puts out it's the
blight and violation status and I can't
remember if he or I sent that out to the
commission members or not does anybody
recall seeing that
yeah I think it came out once with an
email should come out late last week
yeah um the last date I have on The
Matrix gym was February 12th but
so maybe for the next meeting this gets
back to an Marie's comment earlier about
how many how many violations are we
working on and
uh I think uh
Jim's got a
two-page flight violation status and and
a significant number of them are
resolved so there's been a lot of good
work going on obviously we just care
about the ones that are still open and
uh but we'll take uh we'll make it so
that uh we get that out to everybody
again and uh I think that's a a good
document it shows Jim's doing a lot of
good work on that couple of them have
been very hard to uh to get moving along
and I think this ordinance that we
talked about tonight might make some of
those a little
easier I was just wondering I had a
question for Jim that um I don't know if
it'd be blight or just I don't know
what's going on 114 hendy road that
house that has like plastic wrapped
around the first floor you are you
familiar with that or know what's going
on it doesn't appear to be a blight or a
zoning violation the building official
was uh brought in on that and I don't
know what the status of that is um I can
find out it's been that way for over 10
years I
think so I didn't know what was going
on I I believe the
owners started out
uh on a some sort of rehab project and
it became a little bit bigger and there
was a lot more rot um why it's still
repped I don't know and whether it's in
violation of anything I'm not aware of
yeah I can check into it okay
thanks any other questions for
Jim okay next up is John you know John's
doing an awful lot of good good work for
us on planted conservation and that he's
starting to get his fingers in a lot of
other things helping the town out and I
wanted to give him his nickelsworth to
uh share with us any thoughts or
comments that he had each meeting so all
your joh thanks Chad I I you know
obviously I've spoken enough this
evening um working on the the trail
grants um hopefully the the uh wreck
Park the W field Grant um will be moving
forward we did receive to to do some
improvements at the um soccer field and
and put in a playscape and and pickle
ball courts hopefully that'll be moving
forward I would anticipate um I mean
it's in Eric's hands but I would
anticipate um construction
probably I don't know maybe some work in
the fall but um that's that's in Eric's
timeline um and the other thing I would
just note that I've had some
correspondents recently with uh Ryan
Fitch from Fitch Family Farms who are
who are looking to sell their uh the
Christmas tree property on Route Six um
just wanted to reach out to them to kind
of get a sense of how and where they're
marketing and and um maybe get get uh
basically introduce myself I haven't met
the Fitch family um yet uh to just make
sure that they understand that it's it's
an important property and and we would
be interested in in being in touch with
potential buyers to talk about to talk
about options and visions and that sort
of thing so kind of want to get ahead of
that a little little bit so um we'll
hopefully be meeting with Brian um
sooner than later John what was he
specifically asking of
you um well he emailed me thinking he
was getting Jed um but it was it was it
was basically to to reach out and and um
let's see uh it says hoping to touch
base with you and the board uh the
properties for sale looking to build a
relationship with the town and what
could be the next step for our farm and
for our uh for us in terms of commercial
development um and so he you know
basically wanted to sit down and kind of
talk about a plan of attack so you know
I think um understanding you know
understanding what the town has in mind
there would probably help them Market
the
property and I don't know Ryan
either you know I don't know him at all
but I do recall when John was going
through the survey uh responses you know
the number one item for economic
development was for the town to be
involved with
Property Owners on Route Six for for
developing and so this effort seems like
it's in line with what
people are looking for the town to be
doing
so I think that's good news so would
this be in lie of him being able to sell
it in the foreseeable future is he
looking into things if it doesn't
sell I I didn't get that sense um and
when I as I responded to him um you know
know saying that we'd be happy to to
meet and talk about options and and his
his response was no I mean I think they
are looking to
sell um you know literally he says I
actually have no plans for the property
other to sell it but I would like to sit
down um to to talk about possible ideas
and ways to get this sold to the right
commercial development because I think
they they want to be you know a good a
good Steward and a good um you know
Community
partner okay thank
you
John do you know the size of the
parcel yesik I don't offand I can I
could find it relatively
quickly um if you wanna if you want to
move on and I'll I'll I can pull that up
and okay well so I will move on quickly
to the Inland Wetlands water course lays
on and our meeting for this month was
canceled because we had no applications
and so we uh we didn't do anything there
um next up on the agenda
commission discussion anybody have
anything that we would like to
discuss oh come on an
I I should have spoke
already okay so before the meeting
started an was asking me if we had any
thoughts on uh going back to an
in-person
venue uh for the summer months and
uh I'm not opposed to that my my concern
about that is I know John uh has got a
considerable distance and would not be
joining us he would continue to be
remote I uh am a little concerned about
some of the people you know thankfully
our attendance and membership has very
good and I really appreciate that um I
know Kevin lives about as far away from
the meeting as you can get and still be
in
Andover and and I would think that uh
that would be a little
bit I don't know how do you feel about
that
Kevin I mean it's definitely not the
most convenient thing in the world um as
you said I'm pretty much as far as you
could possibly get with with still being
in the town um
I don't know it's a you know
typical day in the life some days are
easy some days are difficult some days
work gets in the way and I stay a lot
later than intended you know so on and
so forth so I don't know I can't say one
way or another so what what I think I'm
gonna do is I'll send out you know an
email and everybody uh you know don't
reply all just reply to me your
preference would be meeting in person
meeting online or you don't care and I
guess one question I do have is if if
you decided to do in person will you
still be doing um will it still be
recorded to be logged for the public it
would and uh and I know Ann who is
you're probably most excited about
getting back to inperson meeting has
taken it on herself to uh become an owl
expert yeah so that I guess that's where
I was going if we're doing an owl I know
I've done a bunch of meetings you know
for for work and whatnot where where we
can we can do hybrid meetings I mean I
know uh I know it's a little more of a
ambitious for some people but from my
experience it hasn't been that big so
people that can make it that night can
be in the room with the owl or whatever
video conference host we we use and then
other people can dial in if as necessary
and that would help us achieve the best
attendance we can you know everyone can
still try to make it even if it's last
minute and people who can make it in
person great um
just J to to that end actually um that
there's a change in the state statute a
couple of years ago following following
the covid protocols is that now um
Commissioners have the right to require
a hybrid
accommodation um so if if any commission
member the remember of the public cannot
but any commission member can request
and require uh a virtual accommodation
to even an inperson meeting so if you
know if one or more members um you know
would like to participate remotely you
have that right by State
Statute and the town has to accommodate
okay yep yeah I also have an answer to
the to the the fit the Family Farm
question but you go
ahead uh do that's all wanted to say
about the uh the the meeting thing so uh
go ahead
John um okay so um actually I'm so can
you see my my my screen the gis map on
it yeah yes so when I when I looked for
Fitch Family Properties on Route Six
actually more than one came up um I
assume the one we're talking about and I
could be very wrong is the one on the
South Side um of Route Six uh that more
of a frontage there is also a little bit
farther to the West um a large uh part
of their their family farm um that has
Frontage on Route Six and then goes back
uh on the adjacent Road um but this
property if this is the one we're
talking about um
is uh 15 and a half
acres with lots and lots and lots a road
Frontage lots of what road Frontage
Frontage yeah yeah visibility it looks
great it looks like the listing on Remax
is for 15.5 Acres right now so that's
that's is the one we're talking about
yep okay so there's your there's your
answer thank
you Jed yes Le um just to go back to the
meeting um format for a minute I think
one consideration needs to be the
Acoustics in the community room um
they're really bad they've been that way
since the community room was built and
maybe Ann can tell us from the board of
Selectmen if there's any discussion
about remedying that because it can some
meetings are much better than others and
if it's not a meeting where the
transition is particularly good I mean
the meeting even if you're in the room I
mean I went to a meeting there recently
and somebody was no more than 10t away
from me and they were speaking to the
front of the room and I had to strain to
listen to what they were saying because
the Acoustics are so bad and they're
they can be worse on a zoom meeting so
Ann does the has the board of Selectmen
discussed lately doing anything to
remedy
that they haven't discussed anything
recently um my best guess for doing a a
hybrid Zoom meeting would be if we have
the table set so that it's pretty close
to the owl which is the uh piece of
equipment that helps make a hybrid
meeting we stay close to that you can
hear
better it would be really good
if okay I see or if people had
individual microphones or you know
something that would go a long way but
thank you were you were you finished
with your remarks about what might help
that situation yeah that's the only
thing I know of right now and I suppose
that maybe when the new
building is finished we could meet in
there sometimes and it would have better
Acoustics it's a different kind of
ceiling and not as high I know that
community room has that really high
ceiling with the wooden ceiling which
makes very
echoey thank you we could also run a few
you know offline tests not in a meeting
uh just to see how the audio comes out
and I know a lot of those like the owl
and other things that I've used have
have pretty good uh noise filtering so
we just have to play with the filtering
aspects to see how much we need to to
take out the Reverb in the room or
whatever else it
is okay interesting thanks
yep any other any other commission
discussion
things okay I'll move on to
miscellaneous and we probably don't have
there's not too much difference between
that commission
discussion any other public
comments okay the date of our next
regular scheduled meeting is April
16 and I'll let you know if we do
anything different
uh that might be premature to change but
we'll we'll we've got a month to work on
that months a long time so uh I'll let
you know uh how that's going to
go and
uh if nobody's got anything else I'll
make a motion to
adjourn second thank you Steve you got
in on that one
um all in favor raise your hand or say I
I hi I
opposed hearing none the motion passes
500 Z thank you for hosting
John uh thank you all for coming
appreciate the support and uh and we'll
be in touch got a couple of things to
work on for next month so